There are many CLI text editors nano, pico, vi/vim, gedit etc.
In this file, we will mostly knowing about vi/vim editor.

To install vim editor, depending on OS, we have to use the following commands:

 sudo apt install vim --> for ubuntu
 sudo dnf install vim --> for centos
 
 BASICS- I:
 
 1) opening a file: vi <filename>
     ex: vi abc.txt
         vi ./dir1/dir2/<filename>
    note that vim tries to open the file if it exists and if it does not exists,
    it will create a new file.
    
    vi <relative path to file>
    vi <absolute path to file>
    A file can be opened both with absolute or relative path to the file.
 
 2) vim modes: command, insert, last lines
    By default a file opens in command mode:
       pressing 'x' deletes the letter highlighted by cursor.
       pressing 'r' helps you replace the letter highlighted by cursor.
       
    To change the mode, just press 'ESC' button once/twice.
    
    If you want to insert text into the file, you need to get into insert mode,
    this can be done by pressing 'i' and then you can insert/edit the text 
    in the file.
    note that whenever you press 'ESC' it will enter command mode.
    
       pressing 'I' in command mode will take you into the insert mode with 
       cursor at the beginning of the line to insert text.
       
       pressing 'a' in command mode will take you into the insert mode to append
       the text immediately after the cursor.
       
       pressing 'A' in command mode will take you into the insert mode with
       cursor at the end of the line to insert/append text.
       
       pressing 'o' in command mode will take you into the insert mode with
       cursor at the start of the new line to insert the text.
       
       pressing 'O' in command mode will take you into the insert mode with 
       cursor at the beginning of one line above.
       
       
    In short, to move into insert mode from command mode, we have
    the following options: i, I, a, A, o, O
    
    To get into Lastline mode: press ESC and "shift + :", then we can see ":" in the 
    last line.
    
       pressing :q! qutiing the file without saving
       pressing :wq or wq! will save and quit the file
       pressing :w! saving the file without closing it
    
    Imp shorcut, to save and quit any file by pressing ESC 
    and then press shift + zz to save and exit the file.
       
       
    BASICS- II
    
    for complete practice and tutorial, type vimtutor in the terminal and press
    enter.
    
    After opening a file using vi editor, we can run any shell command
    by using lastline mode.
    for example
    :!ls
    :!pwd
    :!ifconfig
    
    To search for a string in the given file of text, type /"string" in the 
    command mode and press 'n' for next match and 'N' for previous match.
    
    If the cursor is at the end of the file, then to search from the top,
    press ?"string" to find the search pattern.
    
    Typing "G" will take you to the last line in command mode.
    
    Pressing "*" in command mode to find the next similar pattern of the string 
    under the cursor.
    
    pressing "#" in command mode to find the previous similar pattern of the 
    string under the cursor.
    
    To search for a string and replace it using lastline mode:
    :%s/<stringtobesearched>/<stringtobereplaced/g 
    
    By mistake if you did some error, just type 
    :e! to ignore all the changes and take the file back to the state how it was
    when it is opened.
    
    type 'u' to undo the recent operation
    type ctrl + r to redo the operation
    
    Cutting, Copying and Pasting a line of text in vim editor
    
    cutting: pressing "dd" in command mode cuts a line where the cursor is present.
    
    pasting: move the cursor to the location where you want to paste and type'p'
    
    To cutting multiple lines below the cursor, 
    for example, you want to delete 10 lines below the cursor, then press 10 and 
    then type "dd" in command mode.
    
    COPYING:
    press "v" to select characters.
    press "V" to select lines and the press "y" to copy.
    press ctrl + v to select rectangular blocks, use upper and lower keys for 
    selection.
    
    once you select by pressing "V" and typing "y" to copy in the command mode,
    and then use the up and down arrow keys to move the cursor to the location 
    where you wnat to paste the copied lines of text.
    
    press "P" to paste before the cursor or "p" to paste after the cursor.
    
    In last line mode, press : "set nu" to display the line numbers.
    If you dont want line numbers, "set nonu"
    
    In last line mode,
    If we type :syntax on --> this will highlight with diff colors in the code.
    If we type:syntax off --> this will remove all the highted colors of code.
    
    To make some permanent settings:
    
    In terminal type: vi ~/.vimrc to open the file and write the following 
    commands:
    set nu
    syntax on
    This will make sure that all the files will have line numbers and as well as
    all the code blocks will have appropriate colors for syntax.
    
    
    BASICS-III(Few more shortcuts)
    
    If you want to move to a specific line number, just type the line number 
    in lastline mode:
    ex:   :10 and press enter, this will take you to line 10
          :4 and press enter, this will take you to line 4
          
    Typing "G" in command mode will take you to the last line.
    Typing "gg" in command mode will take you to the beginning of the line.
    
    
    Working with multiple files at once:
    
    vi <file1> <file>
    
    This opens two files at a time and first file can be viewed on the screen,
    but to see the second file, go to lastline mode and
    type :n to move to the second file.
    
    To get back to the first file, go to lastline mode and 
    type :N or type :prev in lastline mode.
    
    vi -o <file1> <file2> This will open both the files by cascading windows one
    on top of the other.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
 
 
 

